In this chapter we're going to introduce
the subject of loops, and a loop is just a
way in Python to execute a number of
statements over and over again.
First of all, let me show you the general
form of the
first type of loop we're going to study
and that's the while loop.
I'm going to open up a note pad, follow,
and the while loop
works like this we start with the keyword
while followed by a relational
expression of some type and then inside
the body of the while loop
will be a set of statements one or more
usually just one statement.
And I'll explain why when we look at a
specific example here in just a minute.
So the concept behind a while loop is,
is that while the value of the relational
expression
is true, execute the statement inside the
body of
the loop and it's no more difficult than
that.
There are several kinds of while loops, we
are going to be looking at.
The 2 we're going to study primarily
are called count controlled, where we
execute the
statements in a loop a number of
times, a predetermined usually normally
number of times.
And then also event controlled loops were
the statements in the loop
body are executed until an event occurs,
or while a event is occurring.
We're going o study these in more details
both of these types of loops.
But first of all lets just look at a
simple example of how a loop is written
and executed.
So we're going to create a script, we'll
call it
while intro .py will be the name of our
program.
So what we're gonna do is we're gonna
display the numbers one through ten.
I know that's not very practical, but it
gives
me a chance to introduce the parts of a
loop
in a very simple example, so you're not
too
distracted by what kind of computation I'm
trying to perform.
So the first thing I'm gonna do is I'm
gonna introduce a variable
and assign it the value one, and we'll say
number is our variable.
And so, what we want to do is print the
numbers
one through ten so we're going to say
while number is
less than or equal to ten, and then we
have a
colon to indicate we're going into the
body of the loop.
Then we want to print the value of number
and then we want to
increment number by one to where right
number is number plus one.
Before we run this, let's exam the parts.
Here's our relational expression, while
number is less than or equal to ten.
So that's the condition that we're looking
for.
Then we print the value of number, and
then we increment number by one.
This last line is very important because
in a count control
loop, which is what this is, but in any
type of loop,.
There must be sort of statement that will
eventually cause your relational
expression to be false, otherwise the loop
will just run and run and run.
Lets call that infinite loop.
So, this statement number is equal to
number plus 1.
As we go through the values of number from
1 to 10, eventually number will become 11.
And when number has the value 11, it
will make this relational expression
number less than or
equal to 10 become false because, of
course 11 is not less than or equal to 10.
So let's run the loop to see how it works.
We'll exit and save.
Then we type in the name of the script or
program and there's our values
1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,10 and of course, going
back and looking at the code again right
here we see what happened.
Numbers 1, so we check the expression one
is indeed less than or equal to ten.
So we print number increment number by one
go back and test again
and two is less than or equal to ten so we
print number, increment number by one.
Now number is three.
We go back and check the expression again,
and
we continue to do that until number
becomes 11.
At that point, 11 less than or equal to 10
is
false, so we drop out of the loop to the
next statement.
There are no more statements, so the
program
stops, and the program stops printing
after 10.
So that's our introduction to the while
loop.
And now we are ready to move to the next
lesson where we
are going to examine in a little more
detail, the count controlled group.